---
id: baking_explained
title: How baking works ?
authors: Maxime Sallerin
---

// SCHEMA

- **baker** allows to participate to the consensus by **creating** new blocks.
- **endorser** allows to participate to the consensus by **validating** the blocks created by other bakers.
- **accuser** : the accuser

### Roll

### Cycle

### Bakers

Tezos randomly elects **bakers** from the list of all nodes that have declared themselves as delegates, in proportion to the amount of XTZ they have. A baker is a delegate, a user who delegates his XTZ is a delegator. Note that a baker does not necessarily need delegators to function, he can play solo, but he has less chances to be selected for baking.
The selected baker will be able to create the next block to add to the chain and communicate it to the network. He will receive a number of XTZ as a reward. Several bakers are elected to create a block, with a priority list. The one with the highest priority will try to create a block. If he fails to do so within the time limit, the hand will pass to the next baker.

A block generated by the baker that does not have priority will simply be invalid and refused by the network.

To create a block or approve it, a baker will have to freeze part of his tokens, which will be made available to him only 5 cycles later.

### Endorsers

Tezos also relies on **endorsers**, bakers who will be able to approve the newly created block, in return for a reward. Then, each other member of the network will have to validate the block on its own version of the chain.

### Accuser

There are also accusers. These network members monitor that a baker does not create two competing blocks at the same time or endorse a block twice. In the event that an accusation is correct, the accuser gets back a part of the funds that were frozen by the baker or endorser as a reward. The other part is burned.

Any attempt to defraud a baker is therefore punished.

> Cryptocurrency tokens or coins are _burned_ when they are permanently removed from the circulating supply on purpose.
