docs/ligo/introduction.md, before:

---
id: introduction
title: Introduction
slug: /ligo
---

import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';
import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';

The goal of this module is to allow a developer to install LIGO transpiler on his operating system 
and give him the essential skills to write and deploy his first smart contract 
on the Tezos blockchain.

It will include the bases of LIGO language, 
inspired by the [official documentation](https://ligolang.org/docs/language-basics/types), 
as well as detailed smart contract examples. 
You will also be offered an exam to check your understanding.

<br/>

![](../../static/img/ligo/intro_schema.svg)
<small className="figure">FIGURE 1: Ligo contextualisation </small>

<br/>

LIGO is a programming language for writing **[Tezos](https://tezos.com/) smart contracts**.
The diagram helps to contextualize the role of LIGO in the Tezos ecosystem.
LIGO takes action in the left part as a development tool allowing
the production of smart contracts (scripts in Michelson),
which can be deployed on the blockchain.
Tezos nodes broadcast information through the Tezos network 
in order to maintain an immutable common ledger (blockchain)

By default, Tezos smart contracts are written in [Michelson](https://opentezos.com/michelson), 
but it is hard to learn low level stack-based language. 

LIGO transpiles scripts written in the high-level *LIGO* language into a Michelson script.

LIGO currently offers three syntaxes:

- **PascaLIGO**, a syntax inspired by Pascal which provides an imperative developer experience.

- **CameLIGO**, an [OCaml](https://ocaml.org/) inspired syntax that allows you to write in a functional style.

- **ReasonLIGO**, a [ReasonML](https://reasonml.github.io/) inspired syntax that builds on the strong points of OCaml. 
  It aims to be familiar to those coming from JavaScript.

Here is an example of Counter contract that handle a single integer "counter" value 
as storage and allows users to increment decrement or reset this counter.

<Tabs
  defaultValue="pascaligo"
  values={[
  { label: 'PascaLIGO', value: 'pascaligo', },
  { label: 'CameLIGO', value: 'cameligo', },
  { label: 'ReasonLIGO', value: 'reasonligo', },
  ]
}>

<TabItem value="pascaligo">

```js
type storage is int

type parameter is
  Increment of int
| Decrement of int
| Reset

type return is list (operation) * storage

function main (const action : parameter; const store : storage) : return is
 ((nil : list (operation)),
  case action of
    Increment (n) -> store + n
  | Decrement (n) -> store - n
  | Reset         -> 0
 end)
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="cameligo">

```js
type storage = int

type parameter =
  Increment of int
| Decrement of int
| Reset

type return = operation list * storage

let main (action, store : parameter * storage) : return =
  ([] : operation list),
  (match action with
     Increment n -> store + n
   | Decrement n -> store - n
   | Reset       -> 0)
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="reasonligo">

```js
type storage = int;

type parameter =
  Increment (int)
| Decrement (int)
| Reset;

type return = (list (operation), storage);

let main = ((action, store): (parameter, storage)) : return => {
  (([] : list (operation)),
  (switch (action) {
   | Increment (n) => store + n
   | Decrement (n) => store - n
   | Reset         => 0}));
};
```

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

This LIGO contract accepts the following LIGO expressions:
`Increment(n)`, `Decrement(n)` and `Reset`. Those serve as
`entrypoint` identification.

Commit message:

English-fluidity and grammar
-imperative developer experience, Imperative c'est du jargon de codeur ?

docs/ligo/introduction.md, after:

---
id: introduction
title: Introduction
slug: /ligo
---

import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';
import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';

The goal of this module is to allow developers to install a LIGO transpiler on their operating system 
and give them the essential skills to write and deploy their first smart contract 
on the Tezos blockchain.

It will include the bases of LIGO language, 
inspired by the [official documentation](https://ligolang.org/docs/language-basics/types), 
as well as detailed smart contract examples. 
You will also be offered an exam to check your understanding.

<br/>

![](../../static/img/ligo/intro_schema.svg)
<small className="figure">FIGURE 1: Ligo contextualisation </small>

<br/>

LIGO is a programming language for writing **[Tezos](https://tezos.com/) smart contracts**.
The diagram helps to contextualize the role of LIGO in the Tezos ecosystem.
LIGO takes action in the left part of the diagram as a development tool allowing
the production of smart contracts (scripts in Michelson),
which can be deployed on the blockchain.
Tezos nodes broadcast information through the Tezos network 
in order to maintain an immutable common ledger (blockchain)

By default, Tezos smart contracts are written in [Michelson](https://opentezos.com/michelson), 
but it is hard to learn this low level stack-based language. 

LIGO transpiles scripts written in the high-level *LIGO* language into a Michelson script.

LIGO currently offers three syntaxes:

- **PascaLIGO**, a syntax inspired by Pascal which provides an imperative developer experience.

- **CameLIGO**, an [OCaml](https://ocaml.org/) inspired syntax that allows you to write in a functional style.

- **ReasonLIGO**, a [ReasonML](https://reasonml.github.io/) inspired syntax that builds on the strong points of OCaml. 
  It aims to be familiar to those coming from JavaScript.

Here is an example of a Counter-contract that handle a single integer "counter" value 
as storage and allows users to increment decrement or reset this counter.

<Tabs
  defaultValue="pascaligo"
  values={[
  { label: 'PascaLIGO', value: 'pascaligo', },
  { label: 'CameLIGO', value: 'cameligo', },
  { label: 'ReasonLIGO', value: 'reasonligo', },
  ]
}>

<TabItem value="pascaligo">

```js
type storage is int

type parameter is
  Increment of int
| Decrement of int
| Reset

type return is list (operation) * storage

function main (const action : parameter; const store : storage) : return is
 ((nil : list (operation)),
  case action of
    Increment (n) -> store + n
  | Decrement (n) -> store - n
  | Reset         -> 0
 end)
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="cameligo">

```js
type storage = int

type parameter =
  Increment of int
| Decrement of int
| Reset

type return = operation list * storage

let main (action, store : parameter * storage) : return =
  ([] : operation list),
  (match action with
     Increment n -> store + n
   | Decrement n -> store - n
   | Reset       -> 0)
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="reasonligo">

```js
type storage = int;

type parameter =
  Increment (int)
| Decrement (int)
| Reset;

type return = (list (operation), storage);

let main = ((action, store): (parameter, storage)) : return => {
  (([] : list (operation)),
  (switch (action) {
   | Increment (n) => store + n
   | Decrement (n) => store - n
   | Reset         => 0}));
};
```

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

This LIGO contract accepts the following LIGO expressions:
`Increment(n)`, `Decrement(n)` and `Reset`. These serve as
`entrypoint` identification.
