docs/dapp/introduction.md, before:

---
id: introduction
disable_pagination: true
title: Introduction
slug: /dapp
authors: Benjamin Pilia
---

One of the main features of blockchains is the _decentralization_: 
each transaction sent is verified by multiple nodes and its validation process does not rely on a single trusted third party.

In the beginning, the idea of decentralization by using Blockchains only applied to currency transfers. 
Over time, the scope of decentralization extended further than just the currency transfers, through innovation in _smart contracts_:
applications could run directly on blockchains, opening the way for more use-cases: making the decentralization of applications a reality.

Such applications are called _Dapps_: **D**ecentralized **app**lications.

They solve the same issues for applications that blockchains solved about banks:
1. **decentralization**: Dapps run on a distributed computing system, as opposed to the overwhelming majority of applications that run on centralized private servers.
2. **transparency**: Dapps are open source: that means everyone can read and check the source code of the app. Every action performed by them can be checked by any node. Thus, the users can more easily trust those applications.
3. **history**: everyone can read the history of all the transactions

> Note that Dapps do not only refer to deploying smart contracts but encompass a bigger range of applications. 
> Blockchains themselves are Dapps, IPFS is also a Dapp...

Dapps are first and foremost applications, and should to this end be designed with great care regarding the user experience, performance and scalability. These are the cornerstones necessary for the massive adoption of Dapps.

So far, the interactions with deployed smart contracts have been performed with CLI (Tezos client for instance) or libraries (Pytezos).
However, these tools are meant for developers and not for the users, who need more user-friendly interfaces.
Thus, for each smart contract, a frontend has to be developed to display information from the contract and make contract calls.


In this module, we will create a Dapp for our Raffle smart contract, developed in the [Ligo module](/ligo/contracts-ligo).
First, we will deploy it on a testnet, to interact with it using a typescript library: _Taquito_. 
Then, we will discover the Temple Wallet, a browser-embedded wallet that allows users to manage Tezos addresses and interact with the Tezos blockchain.
Finally, we will develop a basic React frontend for the Raffle Smart contract, that is interfaced with The Temple Wallet.

Commit message:

First refacto for dapp module

docs/dapp/introduction.md, after:

---
id: introduction
disable_pagination: true
title: Introduction
slug: /dapp
authors: Benjamin Pilia
---

One of the main features of blockchains is the _decentralization_: each transaction sent is verified by multiple nodes and its validation process does not rely on a single trusted third party.

In the beginning, the idea of decentralization by using Blockchains only applied to currency transfers. Over time, the scope of decentralization extended further than just the currency transfers, through innovation in _smart contracts_: applications could run directly on blockchains, opening the way for more use-cases: making the decentralization of applications a reality.

Such applications are called _Dapps_: **D**ecentralized **app**lications.

They solve the same issues for applications that blockchains solved about banks:
1. **decentralization**: the Dapp logic run on a distributed computing system (thanks to smart contracts), as opposed to the overwhelming majority of applications that run on centralized private servers (backend).
2. **transparency**: Dapps should be open source: that means everyone can read and check the source code of the app. Every action performed by them can be checked by any node. Thus, the users can more easily trust those applications. In _Tezos_ case, everyone can read the Michelson code deployed onto the network
3. **history**: everyone can read the history of all the transactions

> Note that Dapps do not only refer to web application interacting with smart contracts but encompass a bigger range of applications. 
> Blockchains themselves are Dapps, IPFS is also a Dapp...

In our case, Dapps are composed of two components:
1. smart contracts deployed onto a _Tezos_ network, containing the Dapp logic (acting as backend). They are the _decentralized_ part of the application.
2. an UI interacting with the deployed smart contracts. This UI can be a web application, a desktop application, a mobile application, a CLI... The UI can be served on a private server, and the sourcecode be private.

Dapps are first and foremost applications, and should to this end be designed with great care regarding the user experience, performance and scalability. These are the cornerstones necessary for the massive adoption of Dapps.

So far, the interactions with deployed smart contracts have been performed with CLI (Tezos client for instance) or libraries (Pytezos).
However, these tools are meant for developers and not for the users, who need more user-friendly interfaces.
Thus, for each smart contract, a frontend has to be developed to display information from the contract and make contract calls.


In this module, we will create a Dapp for our Raffle smart contract, developed in the [Ligo module](/ligo/contracts-ligo). To do so, we will:
1. learn how to make compilations and deployments easier during the dapp development with a tool called _Truffle_. 
2. interact with a _Tezos_ network with a Javascript library: _Taquito_. This library interacts with a node, can fetch all kind of information about the network, can make transactions and contract calls.
3. discover a _Tezos_ wallet (the _Temple Wallet_ in our case), a browser-embedded wallet that allows users to safely manage Tezos addresses and interact with the Tezos blockchain.
4. build the UI of the dapp with _React_, a Javascript/Typescript web development framework
