docs/tezos-basics/governance-on-chain.md, before:

---
id: governance-on-chain
title: Governance on-chain
---

Tezos is a self-amending blockchain network that incorporates an on-chain mechanism for proposing, selecting, testing, and activating protocol upgrades without having to hard fork. [[1]](/tezos-basics/governance-on-chain#references)

## What is self-amendment?
Tezos is a blockchain that can improve itself over time by using a formalized process to upgrade its protocol. In practice, it is similar to the structure of a corporation, where shareholders get to vote on the future direction of the company.

Many other blockchains do not have this type of formal governance structure. Consequently, direction of these projects is often decided by a small group of developers or by a foundation, which may not represent all stakeholders fairly.

## How does it work?
The self-amendment process is split into 4 periods: the _Proposal Period_, the _Exploration Vote Period_, the _Testing Period_ and the _Promotion Vote Period_. Each of these four periods lasts eight baking cycles (i.e. 32,768 blocks or roughly 22 days and 18 hours), taking almost three months from the proposal to activation. The latest and current self-amendments are available at [tezosagora.org](https://www.tezosagora.org)

Should there be any failure in a given period, the whole process reverts to the _Proposal Period_, effectively restarting the process.

![](../../static/img/tezos-basics/Overview_of_the_Tezos_Governance_Mechanism.png)
<small className="figure">FIGURE 1: Overview of the governance Mechanism (Source: <a href="/tezos-basics/governance-on-chain#references">[1]</a>)</small>

## Super-majority and Quorum
The_Exploration Vote Period_ and _Promotion Vote Period_ work the same way. During a vote, each delegate has to use a single ballot: `Yea`, `Nay` or `Pass`. A vote is successful if there is a super-majority and if the participation has reaches the current quorum [[2]](/tezos-basics/governance-on-chain#references).

In Tezos, having the _Super-majority_ means that _Yea_ represents more than 80% of the total of _Yeas_ + _Nays_ votes. 

Example: With 90 votes = 75 _Yeas_ + 10 _Nays_ + 5 _Pass_, the total of _Yeas_ + _Nays_ is 85. 

The number of _Yeas_ required for the validation is 85 * 80% = 68 votes.

The number of _Yeas_ is then high enough to validate the vote (68 < 75 _Yeas_).

A _quorum_ is the minimum number of voters required to deliberate. At the launch of the Tezos Mainnet, the defined quorum was 80%. The _participation_ is the ratio of all received votes, including _Pass_ votes. The quorum evolves with the following coefficients:

```
new quorum = old Quorum * 8/10 + current participation * 2/10
```

Example: New quorum = 80% * 80% +  90% * 20% = 82%, with old quorum = 80%  and current participation ratio = 90%.

Delegates’ votes are weighted proportionally to the number of rolls in their staking balance.

## Phase 1: Proposal period
The Tezos amendment process begins with the _Proposal Period_, during which delegates can submit proposals on-chain. The delegates submit the proposal by submitting the hash of the source code.

In each _Proposal Period_, delegates can submit up to 20 proposals. A proposal submission also counts as a vote, which is equivalent to the number of rolls in his staking balance when the period starts. Other delegates can then vote on the proposal up to 20 times during the _Proposal Period_. 

During this period a minimum of 5% of the bakers must vote for it to be validated to the next stage. 

At the end of the _Proposal Period_, the network counts proposal votes and the most-upvoted proposal proceeds to the Exploration Vote Period. If no proposal has been submitted, if there is a tie between proposals or if less than 5% have voted, a new _Proposal Period_ begins.

## Phase 2: Exploration vote period

In the _Exploration Vote Period_, delegates may vote for the top-ranked proposal from the previous _Proposal Period_. Delegates get to vote either _Yea_, _Nay_ or _Pass_ on a specific proposal. Voting rules are explained in the _Super-majority_ and _Quorum_ section. If the voting participation fails to achieve the _Quorum_ or the 80% _Super-Majority_, the amendment process restarts from the beginning of the _Proposal Period_.

## Phase 3: Testing period
If the proposal is approved in the _Exploration Vote Period_, the _Testing Period_ begins with a testnet fork that runs in parallel with the main network for 48 hours. These forks have access to the standard library but are sandboxed. 

The purpose of this fork is simply to verify that the migration from the old protocol to the new one work's correctly. This 48-hour parallel fork has been set conservatively to reduce the risk of the network perceiving the testnet-fork as the main chain. However, 48 hours of testing is too short to determine whether a proposal is a worthwhile and safe amendment, or not. To find any security vulnerabilities, a testnet matching the amendment proposal is likely to run off-chain during the remaining ~7.3 cycles of the _Testing Period_, allowing stakeholders to evaluate and discuss the amendment as they gain better knowledge of its properties.

## Phase 4: Promotion vote period
At the end of the _Testing Period_, the _Promotion Vote Period_ begins. In this period, the network decides whether to adopt the amendment based on off-chain discussions and its behaviour during the _Testing Period_. The voting rules are identical to the exploration voting period and are explained in the _Super-Majority_ and _Quorum_ section.

At the end of the _Promotion Vote Period_, the network counts the number of votes. If the participation rate reaches the minimum quorum and an 80% _Super-Majority_ of non-passing delegates vote _Yea_ then the proposal is activated in the new mainnet. If not, the process reverts back to the _Proposal Period_. The minimum vote participation rate is set based on past participation rates.

In exchange for their work on the proposal, some delegates can put a symbolic self-reward into the protocol. If the protocol is accepted, they will receive the reward. 

As of (March 2021), 42 periods have passed. A total of 6 proposals have been made and 5 have been validated. 

This diagram sums up the self-amendment process :

![](../../static/img/tezos-basics/Governance_mechanism_uml.svg)
<small className="figure">FIGURE 2: Self-amendment process</small>

## Operations
### Proposal
A proposal operation can only be submitted during a _Proposal Period_.
```
Proposals : {
  source: Signature.Public_key_hash.t ;
  period: Voting_period_repr.t ;
  proposals: Protocol_hash.t list ; 
}
```
`source` is the delegate’s public key hash

`period` is the unique identifier of each voting period

`proposals` is a non-empty list of maximum 20 protocol hashes.

This operation [[3]](/tezos-basics/governance-on-chain#references) can be submitted more than once but only if the cumulative number of active proposals is less than 20. Each time a delegate duplicates a proposal, a vote is counted with the 20 vote maximum applying.

### Ballot
A ballot operation can only be submitted during the _Promotion Vote Period_ or the _Exploration Vote Period_, and only once per period.
```
Ballot : {
  source: Signature.Public_key_hash.t ;
  period: Voting_period_repr.t ;
  proposal: Protocol_hash.t ;
  ballot: Vote_repr.ballot ; 
}
```
`source` is the delegate’s public key hash

`period` is the unique identifier of each voting period

`proposal` is the selected protocol hash.

`ballot` is one of the possible ballot response: `Yea`, `Nay` or `Pass`

## Send a proposal
To send a proposal or a ballot, please refer to [CLI chapter](/tezos-basics/introduction_to_cli_and_rpc)

## References
[1] https://medium.com/tezos/amending-tezos-b77949d97e1e

[2] https://tezos.gitlab.io/007/voting.html#super-majority-and-quorum

[3] https://tezos.gitlab.io/007/voting.html#operations

[4] https://www.tezosagora.org

[5] https://www.tezosagora.org/learn

[6] https://blog.octo.com/tezos-une-blockchain-auto-evolutive-partie-1-3/

Commit message:

Update governance-on-chain.md with Adoption period

docs/tezos-basics/governance-on-chain.md, after:

---
id: governance-on-chain
title: Governance on-chain
---

Tezos is a self-amending blockchain network that incorporates an on-chain mechanism for proposing, selecting, testing, and activating protocol upgrades without having to hard fork. [[1]](/tezos-basics/governance-on-chain#references)

## What is self-amendment?
Tezos is a blockchain that can improve itself over time by using a formalized process to upgrade its protocol. In practice, it is similar to the structure of a corporation, where shareholders get to vote on the future direction of the company.

Many other blockchains do not have this type of formal governance structure. Consequently, direction of these projects is often decided by a small group of developers or by a foundation, which may not represent all stakeholders fairly.

## How does it work?
Since _EDO_ amendment the self-amendment process is split into 5 periods: the _Proposal Period_, the _Exploration Vote Period_, the _Testing Period_, the _Promotion Vote Period_ and the _Adoption period_. Each of these five periods lasts five baking cycles (i.e. 20 480 blocks or roughly 14 days), taking almost two months from the proposal to activation. The latest and current self-amendments are available at [tezosagora.org](https://www.tezosagora.org)

Should there be any failure in a given period, the whole process reverts to the _Proposal Period_, effectively restarting the process.

![](../../static/img/tezos-basics/Overview_of_the_Tezos_Governance_Mechanism.png)
<small className="figure">FIGURE 1: Overview of the governance Mechanism (Source: <a href="/tezos-basics/governance-on-chain#references">[1]</a>)</small>

## Super-majority and Quorum
The_Exploration Vote Period_ and _Promotion Vote Period_ work the same way. During a vote, each delegate has to use a single ballot: `Yea`, `Nay` or `Pass`. A vote is successful if there is a super-majority and if the participation has reaches the current quorum [[2]](/tezos-basics/governance-on-chain#references).

In Tezos, having the _Super-majority_ means that _Yea_ represents more than 80% of the total of _Yeas_ + _Nays_ votes. 

Example: With 90 votes = 75 _Yeas_ + 10 _Nays_ + 5 _Pass_, the total of _Yeas_ + _Nays_ is 85. 

The number of _Yeas_ required for the validation is 85 * 80% = 68 votes.

The number of _Yeas_ is then high enough to validate the vote (68 < 75 _Yeas_).

A _quorum_ is the minimum number of voters required to deliberate. At the launch of the Tezos Mainnet, the defined quorum was 80%. The _participation_ is the ratio of all received votes, including _Pass_ votes. The quorum evolves with the following coefficients:

```
new quorum = old Quorum * 8/10 + current participation * 2/10
```

Example: New quorum = 80% * 80% +  90% * 20% = 82%, with old quorum = 80%  and current participation ratio = 90%.

Delegates’ votes are weighted proportionally to the number of rolls in their staking balance.

## Phase 1: Proposal period
The Tezos amendment process begins with the _Proposal Period_, during which delegates can submit proposals on-chain. The delegates submit the proposal by submitting the hash of the source code.

In each _Proposal Period_, delegates can submit up to 20 proposals. A proposal submission also counts as a vote, which is equivalent to the number of rolls in his staking balance when the period starts. Other delegates can then vote on the proposal up to 20 times during the _Proposal Period_. 

During this period a minimum of 5% of the bakers must vote for it to be validated to the next stage. 

At the end of the _Proposal Period_, the network counts proposal votes and the most-upvoted proposal proceeds to the Exploration Vote Period. If no proposal has been submitted, if there is a tie between proposals or if less than 5% have voted, a new _Proposal Period_ begins.

## Phase 2: Exploration vote period

In the _Exploration Vote Period_, delegates may vote for the top-ranked proposal from the previous _Proposal Period_. Delegates get to vote either _Yea_, _Nay_ or _Pass_ on a specific proposal. Voting rules are explained in the _Super-majority_ and _Quorum_ section. If the voting participation fails to achieve the _Quorum_ or the 80% _Super-Majority_, the amendment process restarts from the beginning of the _Proposal Period_.

## Phase 3: Testing period
If the proposal is approved in the _Exploration Vote Period_, the _Testing Period_ begins with a testnet fork that runs in parallel with the main network for 48 hours. These forks have access to the standard library but are sandboxed. 

The purpose of this fork is simply to verify that the migration from the old protocol to the new one work's correctly. This 48-hour parallel fork has been set conservatively to reduce the risk of the network perceiving the testnet-fork as the main chain. However, 48 hours of testing is too short to determine whether a proposal is a worthwhile and safe amendment, or not. To find any security vulnerabilities, a testnet matching the amendment proposal is likely to run off-chain during the remaining ~7.3 cycles of the _Testing Period_, allowing stakeholders to evaluate and discuss the amendment as they gain better knowledge of its properties.

## Phase 4: Promotion vote period
At the end of the _Testing Period_, the _Promotion Vote Period_ begins. In this period, the network decides whether to adopt the amendment based on off-chain discussions and its behaviour during the _Testing Period_. The voting rules are identical to the exploration voting period and are explained in the _Super-Majority_ and _Quorum_ section.

At the end of the _Promotion Vote Period_, the network counts the number of votes. If the participation rate reaches the minimum quorum and an 80% _Super-Majority_ of non-passing delegates vote _Yea_ then proceeds to the Adoption period. If not, the process reverts back to the _Proposal Period_. The minimum vote participation rate is set based on past participation rates.

In exchange for their work on the proposal, some delegates can put a symbolic self-reward into the protocol. If the protocol is accepted, they will receive the reward. 


## Phase 5: Adoption period

_Adoption period_ is designed to provide enough time to enable the ecosystem and dev tooling to be updated.

After this period the proposal is activated in the new mainnet.

As of (March 2021), 43 periods have passed. A total of 8 proposals have been made and 6 have been validated. 

This diagram sums up the self-amendment process :

![](../../static/img/tezos-basics/Governance_mechanism_uml.svg)
<small className="figure">FIGURE 2: Self-amendment process</small>

## Operations
### Proposal
A proposal operation can only be submitted during a _Proposal Period_.
```
Proposals : {
  source: Signature.Public_key_hash.t ;
  period: Voting_period_repr.t ;
  proposals: Protocol_hash.t list ; 
}
```
`source` is the delegate’s public key hash

`period` is the unique identifier of each voting period

`proposals` is a non-empty list of maximum 20 protocol hashes.

This operation [[3]](/tezos-basics/governance-on-chain#references) can be submitted more than once but only if the cumulative number of active proposals is less than 20. Each time a delegate duplicates a proposal, a vote is counted with the 20 vote maximum applying.

### Ballot
A ballot operation can only be submitted during the _Promotion Vote Period_ or the _Exploration Vote Period_, and only once per period.
```
Ballot : {
  source: Signature.Public_key_hash.t ;
  period: Voting_period_repr.t ;
  proposal: Protocol_hash.t ;
  ballot: Vote_repr.ballot ; 
}
```
`source` is the delegate’s public key hash

`period` is the unique identifier of each voting period

`proposal` is the selected protocol hash.

`ballot` is one of the possible ballot response: `Yea`, `Nay` or `Pass`

## Send a proposal
To send a proposal or a ballot, please refer to [CLI chapter](/tezos-basics/introduction_to_cli_and_rpc)

## References
[1] https://medium.com/tezos/amending-tezos-b77949d97e1e

[2] https://tezos.gitlab.io/007/voting.html#super-majority-and-quorum

[3] https://tezos.gitlab.io/007/voting.html#operations

[4] https://www.tezosagora.org

[5] https://www.tezosagora.org/learn

[6] https://blog.octo.com/tezos-une-blockchain-auto-evolutive-partie-1-3/
